Ayurveda is a traditional system of medicine that originated in India over 3,000 years ago. The term Ayurveda is derived from the Sanskrit words ayur (life) and veda (science or knowledge). Thus, Ayurveda translates to knowledge of life.

The fundamental principles of Ayurveda are based on the concept of universal interconnectedness, the body's constitution (prakriti), and life forces (doshas). There are three main doshas:
1. Vata: Composed of space and air. It controls all movement in the body, including breathing, blood flow, heart function, and the clearance of waste through the intestines. Vata is often considered the most powerful of all three doshas. Things that can disrupt it include eating again too soon after a meal, fear, grief, and staying up late. People with Vata as their main life force might develop conditions like anxiety, asthma, heart disease, skin problems, and rheumatoid arthritis.
2. Pitta: Composed of fire and water. It controls digestion, metabolism, and certain hormones linked to appetite. Things that can disrupt it include eating sour or spicy foods and spending too much time in the sun. People with Pitta as their main life force may develop conditions such as Crohn's disease, heart disease, high blood pressure, and infections.
3. Kapha: Composed of earth and water. It controls muscle growth, body strength and stability, weight, and your immune system. Things that can disrupt it include sleeping during the day, eating too many sweet foods, and eating or drinking things that contain too much salt or water. People with Kapha as their main life force may develop asthma and other breathing disorders, cancer, diabetes, nausea after eating, and obesity.

Ayurvedic treatments often include herbs such as Ashwagandha, Turmeric, Boswellia, Triphala, Brahmi, Cumin, Cardamom, Gotu Kola, Bitter Melon, and Holy Basil. Ashwagandha is an adaptogen that helps the body manage stress. Turmeric, specifically the compound curcumin, has powerful anti-inflammatory effects and is a very strong antioxidant. 

Ritucharya is the Ayurvedic lifestyle recommendations for each season. In the summer (Grishma), the diet should be light, sweet, and cooling. In the winter (Hemanta), one should eat warm, unctuous, and nourishing foods. In the monsoon (Varsha), digestion becomes weak, so food should be light and easy to digest, with a focus on freshly cooked warm foods.
